---
layout: post
type: Nonfiction
title: Northern Souls
by: Jason Diamond
featured_image: northern-souls/header.png
illustrator: Nancy Smith
---

<span class="drop">I</span>n films that are based around rebellious youth, you can usually count on scenes of wistfulness to show that the good times and innocence won't last forever, mixed with some sort of borderline or straight up criminal activity. John Hughes' 1986 film Ferris Bueller's Day Off features one of the best of these scenes, where three of the film's main characters—Matthew Broderick as Ferris Bueller, Mia Sara as Sloane Peterson, and Alan Ruck as Cameron Frye—wander the halls of The Art Institute of Chicago, looking at Kandinskys and Picassos, getting lost in the dots of George Seurat's A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte, and kissing beneath Marc Chagall's stained glass. Hughes himself called the scene "self-indulgent" in the DVD commentary for the film, but I've long thought it to be his defining scene. Set to The Dream Academy's glowing instrumental version of The Smiths "Please, Please, Please, Let Me Get What I Want," Hughes takes a respite from the hilarity and chaos caused by a day of skipped school, and quietly sums up both the blameless days of youth, and the realization that there is a great unknown void that smacks you in the face immediately upon reaching adulthood.

Another film that manages to capture this sort of spirit, while in a far less subtle manner, is the 2006 British drama, This is England. The film, whose main protagonist, Shaun, a 12-year-old boy whose father recently died in the Falklands War, befriends a group of rowdy skinheads who take the lonely boy under their wing. About fourteen minutes into the film, the energy building, there's one sequence that leads into another, first where we see Shaun riding his bike, washing a car for a money, buying and using a slingshot, then again riding his bike alone, a solitary figure on two wheels. It is a lovely scene with just a touch of melancholia to reflect just how lonely youth can be. Shots of Nottingham (where the film was made) are almost pastoral in scope. This leads into the next sequence where one of the skinheads arrives outside of Shaun's window, telling him he's been invited to go "hunting" with the group. What follows almost looks like what a Lord of the Flies adaptation by Frances Truffaut might look like, as Shaun and the skinheads decimate abandoned buildings with glee, letting out their hostility towards an England that has let them down, and having a grand old time doing it, all the while dressed like ragtag, freegan droogs. Despite the violent nature of destruction, it's a very sweet fifteen-or-so minutes.

I've always been a little wary of films about youth subcultures or musical genres. Movies like SLC Punk and the weak 2013 attempt at a CBGB biopic tend to end up feeling like moralist fairy tales instead of good films; but in the case of This is England, the no future-minded English skinheads truly make the film great, and the fact that it's a coming-of-age story as well as a history lesson in one of the 20th century's most misunderstood subcultures imbue the project with inherent cultural value.

I often explain skinheads to people even when they aren't necessarily looking for an explanation. I will tell them that, sure, there is the violence associated with the culture, and that, yes, in the 1980s, racist, far right groups like the National Front recruited skinheads for their cause in hopes of instilling fear into the hearts of those that opposed them. There are still racist skinheads out there who have Swastika tattoos and chant "White power" at punk shows, but I always clarify, "That's never what it was supposed to be about."

Growing up Jewish, I obviously had my doubts about skinhead culture, because Skinhead was then a codeword for Nazis, and when you're Jewish, you tend to want to stay as far away from Nazis as possible. So when I met Sam, whose parents were both originally from Jamaica, it didn't really make sense why, prior to meeting, my friends told me he was a skinhead.

Today Sam is a chef in California with a wife and two children, one he named Jordan, after Michael Jordan—the hero of the Chicagoland area of my youth—and the other named Turner, because he couldn't name a boy Tina, after Tina Turner, his favorite soul singer. Sam and I keep in touch with each other over the Internet. He randomly e-mails me things out of context, or to tell me he read something I posted on Facebook.

"It just looked better," he told me when I e-mailed him asking him why he decided to shave his head and wear tight Ben Sherman shirts and Doc Martens boots. Sam tells me that after his parents moved him to a predominantly white town, he felt "like a weirdo," so he "started hanging out with the other weirdos." Punks, goths, ravers, theatre kids—whoever would have him. "I liked the punks," he says, "But I didn't like most of the music." He tells me that he grew up on a steady diet of reggae, rocksteady, James Brown, and Motown, "and that's the shit I liked."

Skinhead grew out of the Mod subculture of the 1960s. For the working class English kids that couldn't necessarily afford the fine Italian suits and nice haircuts, hand-me-down tennis shirts, work boots, and shaved heads worked better. First known as "hard mods," skinhead started gaining momentum, becoming more and more popular as punk began to take off in the UK. Eventually there were bands filled with skinheads who played a faster, more aggressive style of punk that would be dubbed Oi!, but much like the mods, skinheads started out gravitating more towards classic American rhythm & blues, reggae, and soul music. "That sounded more my style," Sam tells me.

I started hanging out with Sam more and more at the time when his style evolution was going away from the jeans and tight button up shirts and more towards the classic 1960s rude boy style that came out of his parents' Jamaica, and adapted by English kids a decade later. He wore sta-prest slacks, black leather brogues, and a trilby hat. He looked better than anything else anybody was wearing. Fred Perry tennis shirts, black v-neck sweaters when it was colder, parkas in the winter; he was the only person I knew as a teenager who truly dressed well. "I dressed along the same lines until about 22; but I always kept my head shaved," he told me, the shaved head serving as a symbol of his coming-of-age, the subculture that helped usher him into adulthood.

Two years younger than Sam, I started tagging along with him just as he got his license; long drives to the South Side of Chicago to find Salvation Army stores, and sometimes northward over the border into Wisconsin, where we'd search garage sales always with the same purpose in mind: find records. Soul, gospel, and old blues 45s—Sam taught me to dig through dusty crates, ignoring my allergies to untouched vinyl and the dust that whirled upwards into the air. Sam showed me how to recognize the labels from the bigger ones like Stax and Atlantic, to Detroit labels that were dwarfed by Motown empire like Fortune and Revilot, all while flipping past useless soulless pop from bygone eras. You'd flip fast, and if you saw one of the labels or names you were looking for, if you came upon a record featuring songs by J.J. Barnes, Gloria Jones, or some other overlooked performer with a golden voice, it was like being a panhandler finding that one nugget of gold.

There was Sam, and then eventually there was Sean, a 6'6" skinhead who had never thrown a punch in his life. I've always assumed a person of his size didn't need to, but I felt that, if presented with a reason to, that he'd probably decline to fight. Sean didn't dress as well as Sam, but he drank Guinness, and gave me my first sip of the thick stout. Soon enough, as high school slowly started to wind down, I realized that between Sam and Sean--who both lived in different neighborhoods and didn't know each other until I introduced them--that my closest friends were skins. I'd try to explain to other friends that neither of them were the racist jackbooted thugs that the media had painted them to be. Yet the very mention of the word skinhead elicited stares of fright or confusion. "My parents were a bit confused at first," Sam tells me about his Jamaican parents' reaction to his earliest proclamations of being a skinhead. It would make sense, of course, as people from the Caribbean islands, along with immigrants who flocked to England in the 1970s and 1980s, were constant targets for National Front and other racist groups. At the time, the term skinhead was claimed by many organized hate groups, so it seemed odd to Sam's parents to see their son wearing a t-shirt with "Skinhead" in olde English lettering across his chest. Eventually, after a bit of explaining, they understood that racist skinheads are the minority in the subculture's ecosystem. "I think they thought you were weird, because you were my one friend that wasn't a skinhead," he says, "I guess they'd gotten used to it back then."