---
layout: post
type: Essay
title: So Funny It Hurts
by: Eric Anthony Glover
featured_image: glover/header.jpg
illustrator: Kristen Tomanocy
---

Some months after I'd come out as queer to my friends and family, I happened upon a Louis C.K. meme about anti-gay rights advocates--particularly those who argue they shouldn't have to expose their children to same-sex marriages. The meme's caption read, "Two guys are in love but they can't get married because you don't want to talk to your ugly child for fuckin' five minutes?" As much as I'd like to tell you straight allies don't deserve cookies and congratulations for exhibiting the bare minimum of human decency, I'd be lying if I said C.K.'s words didn't move me. After years of shaming from straight people, whether in purposely oppressive ways or casually cruel ones, it always strikes me as miraculous when some of them support my cause--especially if they're cultural icons. And given the thousands of Likes and Shares the Louis C.K. meme received, I'm guessing his words touched a few others, too. Thing is, I doubt it would have gotten as much mileage if the caption had included C.K.'s full quote: "…Who fuckin' cares about your shitty kid? He's probably a faggot, anyway."

On the one hand, I personally find the punchline funny; it subverts the sentimental direction of the setup, makes fools of the people he's frustrated with, and arguably turns the word "faggot" into a weapon against them. On the other, it's not the only time C.K. has used the slur for a laugh, and he hasn't always been so progressive while doing it. Louis C.K. follows a similar pattern with the word "nigger," insightfully addressing the horrors of racism in some of his stand-up, but gluttonously employing the epithet for amusement in other instances. And it's not as if he does so without racial awareness, either; despite having some Mexican heritage, C.K. has publicly acknowledged looking white, considering himself white, and benefitting from white privileges--such as never being marginalized enough for slurs like "cracker" to truly hurt him. As a black man with the opposite experience, I find myself on edge whenever I hear him speak; although I haven't forgotten his beautiful bits bashing racial prejudice, I have to remember that he's prone to blurting "nigger" at whim, and doesn't always care to add a constructive reason.

That said, C.K. seems conscious of the harmful, emotional repercussions that charged language can have on historically oppressed groups. Take the deeply moving opening of Louie's first season episode, "Poker/Divorce." In the intro, C.K.--who plays a titular version of himself in the series he writes and directs--gets into a discussion with his comedian friends over whether it's ethical to casually use the word "faggot" in his stand-up. Although Louie is by no means homophobic, and assumes his audience is aware of this fact, he still listens to his gay comic buddy Rick Crom explain how hearing the slur could affect some of his fans:

> "You might want to know that every gay man in America has probably had that word shouted at them while they're being beaten up. Sometimes many times. Sometimes by a lot of people, all at once. So when you say it, it kind of brings that all back up."

In 2010, C.K. said on NPR's Fresh Air that the scene was based on a conversation he had with Crom in real life, at the age of 22--and that "he never forgot" how "devastating" it can be for queer people to hear the word. In the same interview, Fresh Air's host asked him in what context he finds "faggot" appropriate for stand-up. This was C.K.'s response:

> "Well, I feel like when I get asked that, I get defensive about it. I start saying, 'Oh, well, no,' it's okay that I say 'faggot' because this or that,' but to be really honest with you, I'm not sure why I say it… I feel like I'm not sure I should be saying it… There are times I go, 'Is this okay, really?' What does it mean that I'm hurting people that I don't know, like, who are watching me on TV?... And is it okay to hurt people?... Sometimes I think it is. Sometimes I think it isn't… I'm not sure why I'm so often disgusting on stage. I don't always know where it comes from."

Aside from the fact "sometimes" he thinks it's okay to hurt people, the NPR interview reveals an even more disappointing detail about C.K.'s madness: there's not exactly a method to it. All too often, my apologist friends argue that C.K. gets a pass on certain words because he's being analytical, subversive, intellectual, etc. But the comedian has admitted there's no consistently calculated intent behind his slur use--at least when it comes "faggot." And in any case, his most assertive justification for saying it--which surfaced in his 2008 routine, Chewed Up--isn't particularly thought-provoking. (Admittedly, I think the joke accompanying his argument is amusing: While C.K. would be comfortable watching two men have oral sex, the man giving it would be a "faggot" if he said dared say something obnoxious--to which C.K. would respond, "quit being a faggot and suck that dick.") Despite the entertaining exposition behind his stance, C.K.'s overall argument for using "faggot" is the same any middle-schooler, modern rapper or common conservative would use to save face: "Faggot" doesn't mean anything homophobic to him. Therefore, the people it affects most shouldn't be so sensitive to it.

But even if his argument were convincing, C.K. has still contradicted it. Take his 2009 act, Hilarious. In the routine, C.K. describes a character archetype he used to see in English period films, whom he describes as a "faggy lord with a ruffled shirt." He then does an impression of what the male archetype would say, clearly suggesting that the character is attracted to other men. "Faggot," in this instance, is deliberately tied to the homophobic connotation C.K. has said he's never attached to the slur.

The bit from Hilarious reinforces a simple truth: separating slurs from their cultural baggage is hard work--both for the oppressing group and for their historical victims. Clearly, expecting marginalized individuals to simply turn off their sensitivity at the drop of a hat--even for the sake of comedy--is a sometimes impossible request. Insisting to queer or black communities that "faggot" and "nigger" should be severed from the emotions they trigger is like shoving a man's head into toilet water, feeling indignant about his squirming, and finally yelling, "Breathe, already! There's plenty of oxygen in that H2O!"

Of course, hearing Louis C.K.'s multiple pro-gay bits dulls the edge that comes with his affinity for "faggot." And it seems that C.K. has resolved to no longer use the slur in further stand-up, according to his response in a 2011 Reddit Q&A. Although it's good to hear he's likely retired the word, it's still unsettling that it took him a full 20 years to do so after his seminal talk with Crom. And while he's been making up his mind on the matter, he's given less progressive fans years of fodder for justifying slur use. C.K. addressed the issue in the same Reddit Q&A:

> Q: How do you feel about people using your stand-up as an excuse to say "nigger" and "faggot"?
> 
> Louis C.K.: yeah i don't know. ive seen that happen and it doesn't make me really… so happy all the time. But that's them. I did those bits as a kind of analysis of the words and what feelings they bring and how they're used. I was playing with some fire. It was interesting. I think that the discussion of the word faggot that I did in the [Crom] scene was a bit of an evolution. I pretty much never say faggot on stage anymore. It's just worked it's way into and out of my act. it's not interesting anyomre and i"m not goign to say it just to say it. Nigger… still pretty interesting._ [sic]

What it is about "nigger," exactly, that demands further analysis is beyond me--as is the idea that "nigger" is somehow less worthy of C.K.'s "evolution." Equally over my head is whatever rationalization C.K. has for saying the slur "just to say it," or for being unconcerned by those using his words to do the same. "But that's them," it seems, is C.K. shirking responsibility when misguided fans burn others using the fire he plays with. And although "analysis" would of course be useful if it yielded anything profound, it's difficult to tell what new information C.K.'s "nigger" musings have uncovered.

To be fair, C.K. has not only done excellent bits acknowledging the unfairness of racial injustices, but he's also uttered "nigger" in some of his comedy out of relative necessity. In Chewed Up, for instance, he addresses why the "N-word" phrase offends him more than the actual word "nigger," arguing that the euphemism is simply "white people getting away with saying 'nigger.'" Because of the bit's dependence on differentiating between the two phrases, being confined to using "the N-word" alone would hamper his ability to get his point across with efficient comic timing. Using "nigger" in this portion of his routine has, at the very least, more grounds than none.

Later on in the bit, he explains a time he thought of a white person as a "nigger"--and in a positive context--once again asking the audience to humor him in separating slurs from their traditional connotations. Further along in Chewed Up, he even uses "nigger" and "faggot" to describe a deer that hit his car, perhaps harkening back to his conceit of using slurs as innocuous insults.

In the same vein, C.K.'s character in Louie uses "nigger" on stage in the episode "Country Drive": he discusses the difficulty of reading Mark Twain literature to his daughter, due to "nigger" appearing "40 times a page." Using "nigger" in the stand-up scene, rather than "the N-word," arguably heightens the urgency of his conflict to the audience--and ultimately underscores how disgusting the word still is to him.

Unfortunately, along with the times C.K. has used "nigger" with some vague semblance of judiciousness, there have also been times he's used the word carelessly, and even gleefully. In the 2011 HBO TV special Talking Funny, in which C.K. discusses comedy icons Chris Rock, Ricky Gervais and Jerry Seinfeld, C.K. leaps at the chance to say "nigger" with virtually no prompting:

> Chris Rock: [Louis C.K.] is the blackest white guy I fuckin' know. And all the negative things we think about black people, this fucker…
>
> Louis C.K.: (smiling) You're saying I'm a nigger.

Later on in the discussion, Seinfeld says that he personally never discovered the humor in the slur. C.K. replies that "it would be amazing" if Seinfeld came up with "a great nigger bit." Additionally, C.K. laughs (and bonds with Gervais) over saying "nigger" even when he's off stage.

During his appearance on a 2010 episode of The Opie & Anthony Show, a radio program on which the late black comic Patrice O'Neal also appeared, C.K. pounced at the opportunity to use the word "nigger" where there was no invitation to do so. O'Neal had just finished discussing the origin of the word "kike" as a slur for Jewish people when C.K. interjected:

> "You know where "nigger" came from? Originally? There was some black guy bein' a nigger. So they called him a nigger. He was being a real nigger, so they said, "What a nigger!" And that's where it started… Just a guy who was being such a nigger that it fuckin' made someone say the word."

In a 2011 episode of the same program, C.K., Opie and Anthony discussed the looming possibility of an Adventures of Huckleberry Finn edition being published without the word "nigger" in it. C.K. argued vehemently that the novel would be neutered of its purpose and social relevance if "nigger" were extracted, basing his argument almost entirely on the premise that the book's major supporting character is named "Nigger Jim"--whose moniker, he asserted, testifies to America's shameful racial history. Unfortunately, C.K. is mistaken; "nigger" is only used as an adjective rather than a name for Jim in Twain's classic. Despite C.K.'s misguided point, however, I actually agree with the undercurrent of his position: taking "nigger" out of Huckleberry Finn would be to deny the inhumanity of slavery in the time period Twain wrote about. Leave it to C.K.'s crass use of "nigger" to alienate me, anyway.

At first, his use of the word during the episode is somewhat bearable, given the perfectly legitimate context Huckleberry Finn provides. Of course, in expected fashion, C.K. seemed to relish in saying "nigger" at every conceivable opportunity, and then some--but always in relation to Twain's prose. However, once he was asked who was offended enough to invite censorship in the first place, C.K. replied, "Just niggers." His joke played "nigger" straight, plainly referring to black people so as to win a laugh from Opie and Anthony. "Ironic" as C.K.'s reply may have been, his remark was a result of leaning toward using "nigger" for kicks as opposed to critical thinking.

What's more, C.K. soon went out of his way to involve a black man named Kyle in his "nigger" game. Minutes before Kyle dialed in, C.K. had recalled a time Ronald Reagan discussed Huckleberry Finn on live television and struggled to say "Jim" without attaching "nigger" to it--at least, according to C.K. In the comedian's version of events, Reagan stumbled and said, "um, Jim," due to the difficulty omitting the slur. Once Kyle was on the line, C.K. deliberately addressed him as "Um, Kyle"--effectively calling Kyle a nigger, and immediately chuckling with Opie and Anthony about it.

While it may have been within personal bounds to make on-air "nigger" jokes with O'Neal, with whom C.K. had an established rapport, prodding a black stranger with "nigger" is a different matter. If C.K. understood that you don't have to be a homophobe to hurt gays with "faggot," then he certainly knew you don't have to be a Klansman to wound black people with "nigger." Like other times C.K. has used the slur, there was no "analysis" involved at all--just a display of self-gratifying, vicious humor at a black man's expense.

Strangely enough, C.K. feels the term "crack whore" crosses the line. In a 2013 Rolling Stone interview, he said how demeaning and hurtful the phrase can be, and stood up against name-calling:

> Rolling Stone: You once told Howard Stern a story about an encounter with a crack whore who attempted to murder you.
> 
> Louis C.K.: ...I do want to correct that. "Crack whore" were not my words. I don't think there's anything meaner you could call somebody. "Whore" is a really mean word for a prostitute; it's the derogative. I made no judgment on that woman. She was just doing what she had to to supply her crack habit, but that doesn't make her a crack whore.
>
> Rolling Stone: The part where she teamed up with a dude to try and kill you, maybe you can judge her on that.
>
> Louis C.K.: I can judge her on it, but not as a "whore." That was just rude.

For whatever reason, the same thought process doesn't apply to "nigger" for Louis C.K., although his capacity for protecting people from "mean" language is there. Perhaps it's outweighed by his anxiety over "nigger" and a resulting compulsion to explore it, but as the most powerful comedian on earth today, it stands to reason that he could be more careful with his catharsis, and more compassionate toward his black fans.

I suppose, if nothing changes, that I could simply stop listening to what he has to say. Maybe I will someday, if his material becomes too much to bear. But I sure hope I don't have to. Several times over, I've seen a comedian of conscience and conviction surface during C.K.'s stand-up, bent on panning prejudice and poking fun at privilege. His frustration with racism and homophobia are so humanely and hilariously articulated that it could be a waste to give up on him entirely. It's just a shame that right now--unlike his whiter, straighter fans--I find myself having to choose between his comedy and my comfort. If C.K. sought to change that, his actions would not only be kinder, but braver:

> "I sometimes say terrible things ’cause it's funny to me. It just makes me laugh to say 'AIDS.' I know, it's childish, right? And the word 'nigger' just makes me laugh. It just does. And it's a terrible word and I think that all of us, all of us that use it ironically and think that we're not being racist are fooling ourselves. Because say it to a black guy with your little 'goatee irony' and see how funny he thinks that shit is. It's cowardly, and I'm definitely a part of that cowardice." - Louis C.K. at Comedy Death Ray, 2006